[WG Platforms] Refine capabilities section, add "platform for cloud-native computing" (#289)
cncf/tag-app-delivery: platforms-whitepaper/v1alpha1/paper.md

Inspired by the cross-functional cooperation promised by DevOps, platform
engineering has begun to emerge in enterprises as an explicit form of that

> cooperation, particularly for cloud-native application development and delivery.
> Platforms curate and present foundational capabilities, frameworks and
> experiences to facilitate and accelerate the work of internal customers such as
> application developers, data scientists and information workers.

Reviewer: IMO `, particularly for cloud-native application development and delivery.` feels stuck into this sentence.

I wonder if we can create a separate sentence for this? One suggestion would be to replace this with a sentence either inside or at the end of this paragraph.

Here is a small attempt to try and show what I mean:

```suggestion
cooperation. Platforms curate and present foundational capabilities, frameworks and
experiences to facilitate and accelerate the work of internal customers such as
application developers, data scientists and information workers. Cloud-native application development and delivery has helped set a new bar for speed to market, and delivering the tools to support this requires the same level of focus. 
```

Author: Makes sense. I'm rewriting the "cloud" bit as another sentence rather than an aside in the first sentence.

## What is a platform

> A platform as implemented for cloud-native computing is a layer that provides
> common supporting capabilities and services for many applications and use cases.
> Such a platform provides consistent user experiences for getting, using and
> managing its capabilities and services, including Web portals and pages,
> scenario-specific code templates, automatable APIs and command-line tools.

Reviewer: I think it would be great to have our first sentence here not be cloud native focused. This is an opportunity for us to define a platform, and then a CNCF version of that separately.

Arguably, the CNCF bits could even go below the definitions provided by Atlassian/Fowler/Bottcher as those are still more generic. For example, on line 49 we are once again mentioning cloud native platforms and maybe the back half of this paragraph would work well in that location?

```suggestion
A platform is a layer that provides
common supporting capabilities and services for many applications and use cases.
A platform that supports cloud-native application development and delivery can provide 
consistent user experiences for getting, using and managing its capabilities and 
services, including Web portals and pages, scenario-specific code templates, 
automatable APIs and command-line tools.
```

1. Accelerate product development and delivery by intentionally dedicating teams
   to platform services and thereby reducing cognitive load on product teams
1. Improve reliability and resiliency of products relying on platform
   capabilities by dedicating experts to configure and manage them
1. Accelerate product development and delivery by reusing and sharing platform
   tools and knowledge across many teams in an enterprise
1. Reduce risk of security, regulatory and functional issues in products and
   services by governing platform capabilities and the users, tools and processes
   surrounding them
1. Enable cost-effective and productive use of services from public clouds
   and other providers by enabling delegation of implementations to those providers
   while maintaining control over user experience

These benefits accrue in part because just a few platform teams serve many
product teams, multiplying their impact; in part because platform teams
consolidate management of common functionality, facilitating governance; and in
part because platform teams emphasize user interfaces and experiences above all
else.

> A team of platform experts not only reduces common work \[1\] demanded of product

Reviewer: Are these brackets supposed to be escaped? I saw a pattern of double brackets above.

Author: Yes, they reference the bullet points in the list above. They're in there to keep us editors honest at least and be sure we discuss all the bullet points in the prose. We can remove them in the final, or clarify them.

> teams but also optimizes platform capabilities \[2\] used in those products. And
> because a platform includes typical vetted patterns, knowledge and tools about
> those spread broadly \[3\] and developers can quickly contribute to other teams
> and products built on the same foundation. Governance and controls \[4\] can also
> be embedded in a platform's patterns and capabilities. Finally, because platform
> teams corral providers and provide consistent experiences over their offerings,
> they enable efficient use of public clouds and service providers \[5\] for
> foundational but undifferentiated capabilities like databases and identity.

Reviewer: I think this is an awesome point, but I had a bit of a hard time understanding the sentence. Might be due to a lot of long sentences together? Took a stab at rewording it if it helps others.

```suggestion
teams but also optimizes platform capabilities \[2\] used in those products. 
In addition, a platform typical includes vetted patterns, knowledge and tools 
that are well suited to the organisation. Therefore, as platform adoption 
increases, so does the spread of those shared ways of working \[3\] which 
allows developers to quickly contribute to other teams and products built on 
the same foundation. A shared foundations also allows governance and controls 
\[4\] to be embedded with lower overhead cost per team. Finally, because 
platform teams corral providers and provide consistent experiences over their 
offerings, they enable efficient use of public clouds and service providers 
\[5\] for foundational but undifferentiated capabilities like databases and 
identity.
```

Author: Working on this, agree that it could flow better.

## Capabilities of platforms

As described earlier, a platform for cloud-native computing offers and composes
capabilities and services from many supporting providers. These providers may be
other teams within the same enterprise or third parties like "cloud" service
providers. Platforms enable use of the capabilities and services from these
providers by wrapping them with consistent web portals, documentation, code

> templates, and programmable APIs and tools. Of note, platforms bridge from
> underlying capability providers to platform users like application developers
> while implementing and enforcing desired practices for security, performance and
> consistent experience.

Reviewer: I would love to see the last sentence get a bit more punch than "of note" lends. IMO this is absolutely a key differentiator for successful platforms.

Also added a small added bonus of cost as I think finops has become quite important for people these days.

```suggestion
templates, and programmable APIs and tools. This wrapping of services also 
provides an opportunity for the organisation to provide capabilities while
implementing and enforcing desired practices for security, performance, 
cost optimisation and consistent experience.
```

Author: I'm going to split off the last sentence into another paragraph and precede with some transition. Will also add cost governance :+1:
